Hanuman Chalisa In English And With Description In 
English  

   
Shri Guru Charan Saroj Raj  After cleansing the mirror of my mind with the pollen

Nij mane mukure sudhar  dust of holy Guru's Lotus feet. I Profess the pure,

Varnao Raghuvar Vimal Jasu  untainted glory of Shri Raghuvar which bestows the four-

Jo dayaku phal char  fold fruits of life.(Dharma, Artha, Kama and Moksha).

   
Budhi Hin Tanu Janike  Fully aware of the deficiency of my intelligence, I

Sumirau Pavan Kumar  concentrate my attention on Pavan Kumar and humbly

Bal budhi Vidya dehu mohe  ask for strength, intelligence and true knowledge to

Harahu Kalesa Vikar  relieve me of all blemishes, causing pain.

   
Jai Hanuman gyan gun sagar  Victory to thee, O'Hanuman! Ocean of Wisdom-All

Jai Kapis tihun lok ujagar  hail to you O'Kapisa! (fountain-head of power,wisdom

  and Shiva-Shakti) You illuminate all the three worlds

  (Entire cosmos) with your glory.
   

Ram doot atulit bal dhama  You are the divine messenger of Shri Ram. The

Anjani-putra Pavan sut nama  repository of immeasurable strength, though known

  only as Son of Pavan (Wind), born of Anjani.

   
Mahavir Vikram Bajrangi  With Limbs as sturdy as Vajra (The mace of God Indra)

Kumati nivar sumati Ke sangi  you are valiant and brave. On you attends good Sense

  and Wisdom. You dispel the darkness of evil thoughts.

   

Kanchan varan viraj subesa  Your physique is beautiful golden coloured and your dress

Kanan Kundal Kunchit Kesa  is pretty. You wear ear rings and have long curly hair.

   

Hath Vajra Aur Dhuvaje Viraje  You carry in your hand a lightening bolt along with a victory

Kandhe moonj janehu sajai  (kesari) flag and wear the sacred thread on your shoulder.

   
Sankar suvan kesri Nandan  As a descendant of Lord Sankar, you are a comfort and pride

Tej pratap maha jag vandan  of Shri Kesari. With the lustre of your Vast Sway, you are

  propitiated all over the universe.

   

Vidyavan guni ati chatur  You are the repository of learning, virtuous and fully accom-

Ram kaj karibe ko aatur  plished, always keen to carry out the behest's of Shri Ram.

   

Prabu charitra sunibe ko rasiya  You are an ardent listener, always so keen to listen to the

Ram Lakhan Sita man Basiya  narration of Shri Ram's Life Stories. Your heart is filled with

http://www.hanuman41.org/HanumanChalisaInEnglish.htm 5/3/2008



Hanuman Chalisa In English And With Description In English Page 2 of 4

  what Shri Ram stood for. You therefore always dwell in the

  hearts of Shri Ram, Lakshman and Sita.

   

Sukshma roop dhari Siyahi dikhava  You appeared before Sita in a Diminutive form and spoke to

Vikat roop dhari lanka jarava  her in humility. You assumed an awesome form and struck

  terror by setting Lanka on fire.

   
Bhima roop dhari asur sanghare  With over-whelming might you destroyed the Asuras

Ramachandra ke kaj sanvare  (demons) and performed all tasks assigned to you by Shri Ram

  with great skill.

   

Laye Sanjivan Lakhan Jiyaye  You brought Sanjivan (A herb that revives life) and restored

Shri Raghuvir Harashi ur laye  Lakshman back to life, Shri Raghuvir (Shri Ram) cheerfully

  embraced you with his heart full of joy.

   

Raghupati Kinhi bahut badai  Shri Raghupati (Shri Ram) lustily extolled your excellence and

Tum mam priye Bharat-hi sam bhai  said: "You are as dear to me as my own brother Bharat."

   

Sahas badan tumharo yash gaave  Thousands of living beings are chanting hymns of your glories;

Us kahi Shripati kanth lagaave  saying thus, Shri Ram warmly hugged him (Shri Hanuman).

   
Sankadik Brahmadi Muneesa  When prophets like Sanka, even the Sage like Lord Brahma,

Narad Sarad sahit Aheesa  the great hermit Narad himself, Goddess Saraswati and Ahisha

  (one of immeasurable dimensions).

   

Yam Kuber Digpal Jahan te  Even Yamraj (God of Death) Kuber (God of Wealth) and the

Kavi kovid kahi sake kahan te  Digpals (deputies guarding the four corners of the Universe)

  have been vying with one another in offering homage to your

  glories. How then, can a mere poet give adequate expression

  of your super excellence.

   
Tum upkar Sugreevahin keenha  You rendered a great service to Sugriv. You united him with

Ram milaye rajpad deenha  Shri Ram and he installed him on the Royal Throne. By heeding

Tumharo mantra Vibheeshan mana  your advice, Vibhishan became Lord of Lanka. This is known

Lankeshwar Bhaye Sub jag jana  all over the Universe.

   
Yug sahastra jojan par Bhanu  On your own you dashed upon the Sun, which is at a fabulous

Leelyo tahi madhur phal janu  distance of thousands of miles, thinking it to be a sweet

  luscious fruit.

   

Prabhu mudrika meli mukh mahee  Carrying the Lord's Signet Ring in your mouth, there is




Hanuman Chalisa In English And With Description In English Page 3 of 4

Jaladhi langhi gaye achraj nahee  hardly any wonder that you easily leapt across the ocean.

   
Durgaam kaj jagat ke jete  The burden of all difficult tasks of the world become light

Sugam anugraha tumhre tete  with your kind grace.

   

Ram dware tum rakhvare,  You are the sentry at the door of Shri Ram's Divine Abode.

Hoat na agya binu paisare  No one can enter it without your permission,

   

Sub sukh lahai tumhari sarna  All comforts of the world lie at your feet. The devotees enjoy all

Tum rakshak kahu ko dar na  divine pleasures and feel fearless under your benign Protection.

   

Aapan tej samharo aapai  You alone are befitted to carry your own splendid valour. All the

Teenhon lok hank te kanpai  three worlds (entire universe) tremor at your thunderous call.

   

Bhoot pisach Nikat nahin aavai  All the ghosts, demons and evil forces keep away, with the

Mahavir jab naam sunavai  sheer mention of your great name, O'Mahaveer!!

   
Nase rog harai sab peera  All diseases, pain and suffering disappear on reciting regularly

Japat nirantar Hanumant beera  Shri Hanuman's holy name.

   

Sankat se Hanuman chudavai  Those who remember Shri Hanuman in thought, words and deeds

Man Karam Vachan dyan jo lavai  with Sincerity and Faith, are rescued from all crises in life.

   

Sub par Ram tapasvee raja  All who hail, worship and have faith in Shri Ram as the Supreme

Tin ke kaj sakal Tum saja  Lord and the king of penance. You make all their difficult tasks

  very easy.

   

Aur manorath jo koi lavai  Whosoever comes to you for fulfillment of any desire with faith

Sohi amit jeevan phal pavai  and sincerity, Will he alone secure the imperishable fruit of

  human life.

   
Charon Yug partap tumhara  All through the four ages your magnificent glory is acclaimed far

Hai persidh jagat ujiyara  and wide. Your fame is Radiantly acclaimed all over the Cosmos.

   

Sadhu Sant ke tum Rakhware  You are Saviour and the guardian angel of Saints and Sages and

Asur nikandan Ram dulhare  destroy all Demons. You are the angelic darling of Shri Ram.

   

Ashta sidhi nav nidhi ke dhata  You can grant to any one, any yogic power of Eight Siddhis

Us var deen Janki mata  (power to become light and heavy at will) and Nine Nidhis

  (Riches,comfort,power,prestige,fame,sweet relationship etc.)

  This boon has been conferred upon you by Mother Janki.






Ram rasayan tumhare pasa  You possess the power of devotion to Shri Ram. In all rebirths

Sada raho Raghupati ke dasa  you will always remain Shri Raghupati's most dedicated disciple.

   

Tumhare bhajan Ram ko pavai  Through hymns sung in devotion to you, one can find Shri Ram

Janam janam ke dukh bisravai  and become free from sufferings of several births.

   
Anth kaal Raghuvir pur jayee  If at the time of death one enters the Divine Abode of Shri Ram,

Jahan janam Hari-Bakht Kahayee  thereafter in all future births he is born as the Lord's devotee.

   

Aur Devta Chit na dharehi  One need not entertain any other deity for Propitiation, as

Hanumanth se hi sarve sukh karehi  devotion of Shri Hanuman alone can give all happiness.

   

Sankat kate mite sab peera  One is freed from all the sufferings and ill fated contingencies of

Jo sumirai Hanumat Balbeera  rebirths in the world. One who adores and remembers Shri Hanuman.

   

Jai Jai Jai Hanuman Gosahin  Hail, Hail, Hail, Shri Hanuman, Lord of senses. Let your victory

Kripa Karahu Gurudev ki nyahin  over the evil be firm and final. Bless me in the capacity as my

  supreme guru (teacher).

   

Jo sat bar path kare kohi  One who recites Chalisa one hundred times, becomes free from the

Chutehi bandhi maha sukh hohi  bondage of life and death and enjoys the highest bliss at last.

   

Jo yah padhe Hanuman Chalisa  All those who recite Hanuman Chalisa (The forty Chaupais)

Hoye siddhi sakhi Gaureesa  regularly are sure to be benedicted. Such is the evidence of no less a

  witness as Bhagwan Sankar.

   

Tulsidas sada hari chera  Tulsidas as a bonded slave of the Divine Master, stays perpetually at

Keejai Das Hrdaye mein dera  his feet, he prays "Oh Lord! You enshrine within my heart & soul."

   

Pavantnai sankat haran,  Oh! conqueror of the Wind, Destroyer of all miseries, you are a

Mangal murti roop.  symbol of Auspiciousness.

Ram Lakhan Sita sahit,  Along with Shri Ram, Lakshman and Sita, reside in my heart.

Hrdaye basahu sur bhoop.  Oh! King of Gods.
